Well, brothers, let’s open our Bibles,
and let’s read again our text for today
—1 Corinthians 10:23.
It says: “All things are lawful,
but not all things are advantageous.”
And then you notice it goes on to say:
“All things are lawful,
but not all things build up.
“Let each one keep seeking,
not his own advantage,
but that of the other person.”
Now, what is Paul trying to tell us here?
In the 1975 Watchtower,
commenting on these two verses,
this is what The Watchtower  said:
“Within the framework of Christian law
“there is a wide latitude of action
“and the Christian has to decide many matters
“according to his Christian conscience.
“But he must consider also
the consciences of others.
“Not all things build up
either himself or others.”
Well, now, what’s the point?
There are many, many areas of life
where there is not a specific law
that governs our action as Christians.
We have to use Bible principles
and the wonderful gift of the conscience
that Jehovah God has given us.
But most often, we tend to think
of the conscience
as something that prevents us
from doing what is wrong.
In fact, maybe we tend to think of it
as being like the smoke alarm.
When there’s just
that slightest hint of smoke,
that alarm goes off to protect us,
to signal that something is wrong
—something needs to be done.
Well, it’s true that our
well-trained conscience can alert us
when we’re about to enter
into a course that could cause us danger.
But if our conscience is really well-trained
according to the thinking
of our heavenly Father, Jehovah,
it will be able to do even more than that.
Now, what do we have in mind?
Well, let’s consider an example of King David
when he had to flee from Jerusalem
at the time of the revolt of Absalom.
Now, let’s go to 2 Samuel chapter 17.
Now, as you’re looking this up,
2 Samuel chapter 17,
you’ll remember that down here in verse 27,
three faithful men came to know
that David and some of his men
were out there in the wilderness.
Now, what did they do?
Look at verse 27:
“As soon as David came to Mahanaim,
“Shobi the son of Nahash
from Rabbah of the Ammonites,
“Machir the son of Ammiel from Lodebar,
“and Barzillai the Gileadite from Rogelim
“brought beds, basins, clay pots,
“wheat, barley, flour, roasted grain,
“broad beans, lentils, parched grain,
“honey, butter, sheep, and cheese.
“They brought all of this out for David
and the people with him to eat,
“for they said [now, notice this]:
“‘The people are hungry and tired
and thirsty in the wilderness.’”
Now, what’s the point?
You see, these men came to know
about David and his men being out there
in the wilderness with no supplies.
Now, how did that affect them?
Well, their conscience began to work,
and it showed them they needed
to do something to help those men.
Now, when you look at that list of things,
it’s obvious they didn’t just send
one or two things,
but their conscience moved them
to really do something kind,
to do something generous,
to do something good to help them.
Now, consider also
that helping David was risky.
Absalom was more than willing to kill people
who were going to support David.
So it took a risk of even their own safety.
But these men,
because of their good conscience,
were moved to do the right thing,
the good thing, the generous thing.
Now, what do we learn from that?
Well, a well-trained conscience
will not just simply prevent us
from doing the wrong thing,
but it has the power to move us
to do what’s right,
to do what’s kind, what’s generous,
what’s loyal
to our brothers and to Jehovah.
Well, now, Jesus also taught this lesson.
And let’s look at the example
that Jesus taught in this parable.
Now, of course, we always used to call it
the parable of the good Samaritan,
but now we call it the parable
of the neighborly Samaritan.
I’m still getting used to that myself.
But Luke chapter 10—
And let’s just remind ourselves
of some of the details about this.
So you remember, first of all, in verse 30:
“[This] man was going . . .
from Jerusalem to Jericho
and [he] fell victim to robbers.”
And verse 30 says that they ‘beat him,
and they left him half-dead’ on the road.
Now look at verse 31.
It says here that a priest
was going by on the road
and that he saw this man
laying on the road half-dead.
And what did he do?
It says he crossed the street.
He went to the other side and passed by
as though that man was not even there.
But now look at verse 32.
Here comes a Levite, and he sees him also.
But what does he do?
Just exactly the same thing.
He crosses the road and passes by
to avoid having to even look
at this man who was in distress.
What can you say about those two men?
Their conscience was
not working at all, was it?
But now what about the Samaritan?
Verse 33 says that when he saw this man,
“he was moved with pity.”
And what did he do?
Verse 34 says: ‘He approached him,
‘he bandaged his wounds,
he poured oil and wine on them,
‘he put the man on his own animal,
‘he brought him to an inn,
he took care of him,
‘he took out money,
and he gave it to the innkeeper.
‘He said: “Take care of him;
‘“whatever you spend besides this,
I’ll come back and I’ll give it to you.
I’ll pay you.”’
Now, what do we know about this man
who was a Samaritan?
Obviously, his conscience was working,
and it told him what was
the right thing to do
—what was the good thing,
the generous thing,
the helpful thing to do—
for this man.
Well, what’s the point?
This good conscience
—if it’s well-trained by Bible principles
and by the thinking of our God, Jehovah—
will do so much more
than just prevent us
from entering into a wrong course.
It will stimulate us to do the right thing,
the generous thing, the kind thing.
Now, how can we use this information
in the midst today
of this coronavirus pandemic?
Well, of course, no doubt all of us right now
are feeling some measure
of anxiety and stress
as this goes on week after week,
having to be in our room,
sheltering in place, and so on.
It’s not an easy situation for any of us.
In one country in Europe
that has been very hard hit
by the pandemic,
a sister was in the hospital
for cancer treatment
when the lockdown was enforced.
Now, her daughter
and son-in-law are at Bethel.
They’re very, very close to the hospital,
but they were not able to go
and visit her because of the situation.
Now, as the Memorial was approaching,
this dear sister was so worried
that she was going to have
to celebrate the Memorial
all by herself in the hospital.
But can you imagine how touched she was
when she found out that a sister
who worked in the hospital
had very kindly decided
to travel to the hospital
when it was not her shift
just for the sole purpose
of being with our sister
and celebrating the Memorial?
She dressed up
in all the appropriate protective gear
and then enjoyed the Memorial
with our sister who was alone
at the hospital.
How beautiful!
In the same country in Europe,
the brothers told about a young brother
who works also in a hospital
and, of course, because the country
has been so hard hit
and some of our brothers
and sisters have died
as a result of the pandemic,
this dear brother has made a point
of going to visit
these various brothers and sisters
who are dying
to offer them comfort
because their own family members
are not able to come to the hospital
and be with them at that time.
Can you imagine how comforting it’s been
for those family members to know
that this young brother has taken
the initiative to be with them,
to comfort them, to show them love
in such a difficult time?
Well, brothers, what do we learn
from all of this?
We are in a time of increased stress,
of increased anxiety.
We all have the power to help others
through acts of kindness
and deeds of goodness
that show generosity and love.
Let’s be motivated by our good conscience
to do those good and kind
and generous things
that really show that we’re imitators
of our heavenly Father, Jehovah.
And as we do, we’re going to find
that our stress will be relieved,
and at the same time, we’ll show
that we’re eager to do things
that are not only lawful
but also that are advantageous.